readme.md, before:

# Svalin

## ⚠️WARNING⚠️

> [!WARNING]
> **This repository is not yet ready for production use.**
> 
> A lot of this code is still being heavily worked, is missing security checks and has not been reviewed.
> 
> The current focus is getting this behemoth of a project working in any state.
> 
> Once the programm is usable, it's going to be time to slowly but surely improve everything.
> 
> Feel free to browse the codebase and create issues for any problems you see.
>
> If you have questions or suggestions, you're also welcome to create an issue :)

## What is this ?

This is my Repository for developing a production ready Svalin.

### Purpose

Svalin is supposed to be the first open-source end-to-end-secured remote managment software with a focus on small businesses, individuals and goverment agencies.
This codebase is still far from where I want it to be, but I have to start somewhere.

Svalin has the following guidelines:
- Be easy to setup and use
- Be secure by default
- Allow self-hosting

Basically I'm trying to build a remote managment system which I personally enjoy using.
I'm hoping you'll enjoy it too.

If there is something bothering you, whether it's a bug, a cumbersome part of the UI or a missing feature I'd be happy to hear about it.

### Why I'm building Svalin

Before I continue, let me say this: If you're happy with your solution, you don't have to switch.
By it's design Svalin will not be for everyone and if you prefer something else, that's ok.
Nontheless, if you want to try it out, I'd be happy to hear about your experience and what you think is still lacking.

I started Svalin because I was fed up with Teamviewer and because RPort stopped being open source.

I've always been taught and told, that I shouldn't blindly trust a product because I pay for it.
Whereever I can, I try to switch to open source projects which allow me to self host my services
and which don't just come with a "Trust be Bro" guarantee.

Teamviewer pros:
- Easy to use
- quick to get started
- once you get your devices registered it's quite reliable

Teamviewer cons:
- It's expensive
- The "RMM" features are not great
- The new group system and client keep acting up
- works on linux, but not particularily great
- no way to just access a remote webinterface directly (at least not easily)

RPort pros:
- great linux support
- nice dashboard informations for connected devices
- easy to connect to devices with webinterface

RPort cons:
- Once the server is compromised, all devices are
- No builtin remote desktop


I started thinking about what I would like my perfect remote software to look like.
- Easy to use, if possible, should not require any terminal knowledge
- End to end encryption that the server cannot break
- Can pierce through NAT, no special configuration on controlled nodes needed
- Can remote control both desktop and webinterfaces
- Self-hostable, but could also be offered as a hosted solution (not everyone might want to self host)
- Focused on small businesses, not big tech
- includes nices managment features, not just remote desktop.
- Open source (obviously)

Obviously I'm far from reaching all of these, but that won't stop me from trying.

### Why not Rustdesk?

Rustdesk follows a different approach and Idea. They much more closely resemble the Teamviewer experience.

Svalin on the other hand is more inspired by RPort. Svalin isn't made for big operations, but rather for small businesses and individuals.
Because of this, svalin was developed with the idea of a central server per organisation.

But even RPort is quite a bit different. Svalin's core isn't actually a remote control software,
but a system to connect different nodes and allow them to communicate with each other.
The remote managment software is just built on top of that.

Thanks to this simple approach, Svalin could be extended for all kind of applications.
One example would be to use Svalin like a Tailscale coordinator and configure Wireguard Mesh networks with just a few clicks.

While the svalin RPC-System is it's own crate, it's still missing a higher level API to build your own network.
If you're interested in that, I'd be happy to hear about it.

If you're based in the EU, you might also be happy to hear, that Svalin is a german project.

TLDR: Rustdesk is primarily a remote software while Svalin is more similar to a generic coordinator and managment software. Use whatever fits your use case best.

## Quickstart

WIP - this isn't really complete yet.

Pre-Flight-Checklist:
- [X] add graceful shutdown
- [X] create a debian package
- [X] create a docker image
- [ ] add logic for login ( don't forget fake hashing parameters )
- [ ] add remote terminal

Svalin currently has 2 executables:
- svalin
  This can run both the server and the agent.
- svalin_iced
  This is the client with a GUI written in iced.

Right now there are both a debian package as well as a docker image for the main executable.

You'll find the executables and packages under the Releases section.

> [!Note]
> While you could run the agent in a docker container, it's obviously not meant to.
> If you have a specific use case why you'd need to run the agent in a container, please create an issue.

### Installing the server

The server does not yet have an official installation method. A Debian package will come soon.

You can start the server with the following command: `svalin server 0.0.0.0:<PORT>`
Make sure the client and agents can reach the udp port you specified.

### Setting up the client

The client does not yet have an official installation method.

When starting the client without any existing profiles, you will be asked to create one.
enter the server address with port (e.g. `svalin.example.com:1234`) and follow the steps to create your root user.

> [!CAUTION]
> **MAKE SURE YOU WRITE DOWN YOUR ROOT PASSWORD - YOU CANNOT RECOVER IT**

On each new start you can select a profile to use or you can create a new one.

> [!Note]
> **To open a profile you need the corresponding password to decrypt your private key**

### Setting up the agent

The agent does not yet have an official installation method. A Debian package will come soon. Windows is planned, but will take a bit more work.

When first using the client, start it with `svalin agent init <HOST:PORT>`.

The agent will print out a join code. Add a new device in the client and enter the join code when asked.

After receiving the join code, the client will establish an encrypted connection to the agent. The agent should now print out it's confirm code.
Enter the confirm code along with the device name in the client and click confirm to add the new device.

> [!Note]
> The confirm code is derived from the TLS session and is meant to prevent someone from impersonating the agent.

## Contributing

At the moment there is not an official way to contribute yet.
If you want to help you can create an issue so we can coordinate our efforts.

## Extending

Currently Svalin isn't really ready to be extended.
If you have a project or some functionality in mind, please create an issue describing what you would like to do.
Then we can work on exposing the svalin API to fit your needs.

# Architecture

## crate svalin

This crate is the actual Svalin library used by the GUI to control the server and devices.

It also builds to the rust standalone which can run as either server or agent.

If you want to build your own UI, you should find everything you need here.
If you don't - just create an issue.

## crate svalin_iced

This crate contains the Client interface based on iced.

## crate svalin_rpc

This crate contains the inner workings of the RPC system used to send data between devices

Svalins RPC-API is based on these basic primitives.

### The Connection primitive

A connection is a way to communicate with another node.
It allows you to open sessions, which in turn are used to send and receive data, most of the time in form of the very basic RPC-Commands.

A connection could be a direct QUIC connection to the server,
the ability to tunnel through the svalin main server or it could wrap a direct connection to another node.

As a connection is just a trait, svalin can easily be extended to tunnel through other protocols or build direct P2P connections.

### The Session primitive

A session is an open communication channel to another node. A session is usually bound to a context.
So you'd use one session to monitor running processes and another one to connect to a terminal session.

The session already provides the utility to write and read data types which implement Serde's Serialize and Deserialize traits.

Underneath the surface, the session uses a transport, which is just an asynchronous bi-directional byte stream.
This means that a session can run through basically every network connection or protocol.

That very same logic is also used to handle the E2E encryption. To establish an encrypted tunnel,
svalin just replaces the normal QUIC transport with a TLS-stream based on tokio-rustls.
The underlying RPC system doesn't know or care about the encryption.

## crate svalin_pki

This crate contains the code for certificate generation and encryption.

### TBRHL (Transaction Based Rolling Hash Ledger)

This primitive (yet to be completed) is planned to be the base for svalin's integrity system.

It's a log of transactions where each transaction contains the hash of the last one and is then signed by the entity creating the transaction.
Once available on more than one device, the log cannot be modified locally without leaving a trace as each device checks the plausability of each transaction.

So basically a cryptographic append-only-log

The simplest example is the transaction log which contains information about who may access an agent.
By comparing the hash of the latest transactions between an agent and a server, a client may detect malicous manipulation.
Every device working with this log will verify it's integrity and plausability by itself, making manipulation extremely difficult.

Each Transaction contains the following data:
- incremental transaction id
- Timestamp
- Hash of previous transaction
- Fingerprint of certificate used to sign
- data

For this to work, the log must conform to these standarts:
- [ ] Each transaction is signed
- [ ] Transactions are synchronized (easy with only one server)
- [ ] Transactions are serializeable

There are some challenges left though:
- [ ] How are old transactions treated when a certificate used to sign them runs out?
- [ ] How are old transactions treated when a certificate used to sign them gets revoked?
- [ ] When should an entity other than agent and server get access? Becauses that might leak the certificates.

One thing I'm still not clear about is how to distribute the certificates.
I could just put them all in a large THRBL together with revocations and distribute them that way.
The problem is, that this would leak all active and old certificates.

### crate svalin_macros

You'll find svalins macros here

### crate svalin_sysctl

This crate contains code used by the agent for monitoring and managing a system.

You might be interested in this crate if you want to build something similar to svalin or maybe a local UI for managing certain system settings.

# Todo

## Strategy
- [ ] get really basic version working (soon)
- [ ] add test so refactors arent as risky (already got some, but need more.)
- [ ] find some epic rust nerds who can help me fix my architecture and get this in a stable state
- [ ] find a way to reveal this with a big bang so I can find even more really cool nerds to gather feedback and extend this
- [ ] have a small but nice community around svalin
- [ ] ???
- [ ] profit

## Simple
- [ ] Show Unlock Error when password on profile unlock wrong
- [ ] Fix as many warnings as possible

## Bigger
- [ ] Add documentation for all public RPC types
- [ ] Add support for IPv6
- [ ] Rate Limiting
- [X] Init Routine
- [ ] Login Routine (make sure the server sent hashing parameters are strong enough and non existant users are simulated with key derived hashing parameters)
- [X] Unlock Routine
- [X] Make Credentials use an Arc internally
- [X] Agent init / join
- [X] Connection forwarding
- [X] E2E Encryption
- [X] List all agents with connection status
- [X] Show realtime performance ingo
- [X] Basic Port-Forwarding
- [ ] Remote Terminal (UI has been to laggy so far)

## Architecture
- [X] crate for local system managment and package management (WIP)
- [X] Framework for permission system
- [ ] Basic permission system
- [ ] Network Security System and Alerting
- [ ] Replace certificate distribution with better system (possibly TBRHL)
- [ ] Think of way to nicely and securely distribute group and system state
- [ ] More general information subscription system (e.g. CPU utilization, connected clients)

## Milestones
- [ ] Basic Managment (Live)
- [ ] Remote Desktop
- [ ] Network Security System and Alerting
- [ ] IPv6 Support
- [ ] Group Configuration Managment
- [ ] 

## Svalin Network Architecture

1. QUIC with Network Authentication and Path encryption
2. Routing through the Svalin Network
3. P2P Encryption

Commit message:

currently failing to properly refactor the terminal widget so it works better with iced

readme.md, after:

# Svalin

## ⚠️WARNING⚠️

> [!WARNING]
> **This repository is not yet ready for production use.**
>
> A lot of this code is still being heavily worked, is missing security checks and has not been reviewed.
>
> The current focus is getting this behemoth of a project working in any state.
>
> Once the programm is usable, it's going to be time to slowly but surely improve everything.
>
> Feel free to browse the codebase and create issues for any problems you see.
>
> If you have questions or suggestions, you're also welcome to create an issue :)

## What is this ?

This is my Repository for developing a production ready Svalin.

### Purpose

Svalin is supposed to be the first open-source end-to-end-secured remote managment software with a focus on small businesses, individuals and goverment agencies.
This codebase is still far from where I want it to be, but I have to start somewhere.

Svalin has the following guidelines:
- Be easy to setup and use
- Be secure by default
- Allow self-hosting

Basically I'm trying to build a remote managment system which I personally enjoy using.
I'm hoping you'll enjoy it too.

If there is something bothering you, whether it's a bug, a cumbersome part of the UI or a missing feature I'd be happy to hear about it.

### Why I'm building Svalin

Before I continue, let me say this: If you're happy with your solution, you don't have to switch.
By it's design Svalin will not be for everyone and if you prefer something else, that's ok.
Nontheless, if you want to try it out, I'd be happy to hear about your experience and what you think is still lacking.

I started Svalin because I was fed up with Teamviewer and because RPort stopped being open source.

I've always been taught and told, that I shouldn't blindly trust a product because I pay for it.
Whereever I can, I try to switch to open source projects which allow me to self host my services
and which don't just come with a "Trust be Bro" guarantee.

Teamviewer pros:
- Easy to use
- quick to get started
- once you get your devices registered it's quite reliable

Teamviewer cons:
- It's expensive
- The "RMM" features are not great
- The new group system and client keep acting up
- works on linux, but not particularily great
- no way to just access a remote webinterface directly (at least not easily)

RPort pros:
- great linux support
- nice dashboard informations for connected devices
- easy to connect to devices with webinterface

RPort cons:
- Once the server is compromised, all devices are
- No builtin remote desktop


I started thinking about what I would like my perfect remote software to look like.
- Easy to use, if possible, should not require any terminal knowledge
- End to end encryption that the server cannot break
- Can pierce through NAT, no special configuration on controlled nodes needed
- Can remote control both desktop and webinterfaces
- Self-hostable, but could also be offered as a hosted solution (not everyone might want to self host)
- Focused on small businesses, not big tech
- includes nices managment features, not just remote desktop.
- Open source (obviously)

Obviously I'm far from reaching all of these, but that won't stop me from trying.

### Why not Rustdesk?

Rustdesk follows a different approach and Idea. They much more closely resemble the Teamviewer experience.

Svalin on the other hand is more inspired by RPort. Svalin isn't made for big operations, but rather for small businesses and individuals.
Because of this, svalin was developed with the idea of a central server per organisation.

But even RPort is quite a bit different. Svalin's core isn't actually a remote control software,
but a system to connect different nodes and allow them to communicate with each other.
The remote managment software is just built on top of that.

Thanks to this simple approach, Svalin could be extended for all kind of applications.
One example would be to use Svalin like a Tailscale coordinator and configure Wireguard Mesh networks with just a few clicks.

While the svalin RPC-System is it's own crate, it's still missing a higher level API to build your own network.
If you're interested in that, I'd be happy to hear about it.

If you're based in the EU, you might also be happy to hear, that Svalin is a german project.

TLDR: Rustdesk is primarily a remote software while Svalin is more similar to a generic coordinator and managment software. Use whatever fits your use case best.

## Quickstart

WIP - this isn't really complete yet.

Pre-Flight-Checklist:
- [X] add graceful shutdown
- [X] create a debian package
- [X] create a docker image
- [X] add logic for login ( don't forget fake hashing parameters )
- [ ] add remote terminal

Svalin currently has 2 executables:
- svalin
  This can run both the server and the agent.
- svalin_iced
  This is the client with a GUI written in iced.

Right now there are both a debian package as well as a docker image for the main executable.

You'll find the executables and packages under the Releases section.

> [!Note]
> While you could run the agent in a docker container, it's obviously not meant to.
> If you have a specific use case why you'd need to run the agent in a container, please create an issue.

### Installing the server

Currently the server can be installed via a debian package.
I would recommend using the docker image instead, but I'll need a bit more time before publishing one.

You can start the server with the following command: `svalin server 0.0.0.0:<PORT>`
Make sure the client and agents can reach the udp port you specified.

### Setting up the client

The client does not yet have an official installation method.

When starting the client without any existing profiles, you will be asked to create one.
enter the server address with port (e.g. `svalin.example.com:1234`) and follow the steps to create your root user.

> [!CAUTION]
> **MAKE SURE YOU WRITE DOWN YOUR ROOT PASSWORD - YOU CANNOT RECOVER IT**

On each new start you can select a profile to use or you can create a new one.

> [!Note]
> **To open a profile you need the corresponding password to decrypt your private key**

### Setting up the agent

The agent does not yet have an official installation method. A Debian package will come soon. Windows is planned, but will take a bit more work.

When first using the client, start it with `svalin agent init <HOST:PORT>`.

The agent will print out a join code. Add a new device in the client and enter the join code when asked.

After receiving the join code, the client will establish an encrypted connection to the agent. The agent should now print out it's confirm code.
Enter the confirm code along with the device name in the client and click confirm to add the new device.

> [!Note]
> The confirm code is derived from the TLS session and is meant to prevent someone from impersonating the agent.

## Contributing

At the moment there is not an official way to contribute yet.
If you want to help you can create an issue so we can coordinate our efforts.

## Extending

Currently Svalin isn't really ready to be extended.
If you have a project or some functionality in mind, please create an issue describing what you would like to do.
Then we can work on exposing the svalin API to fit your needs.

# Architecture

## crate svalin

This crate is the actual Svalin library used by the GUI to control the server and devices.

It also builds to the rust standalone which can run as either server or agent.

If you want to build your own UI, you should find everything you need here.
If you don't - just create an issue.

## crate svalin_iced

This crate contains the Client interface based on iced.

## crate svalin_rpc

This crate contains the inner workings of the RPC system used to send data between devices

Svalins RPC-API is based on these basic primitives.

### The Connection primitive

A connection is a way to communicate with another node.
It allows you to open sessions, which in turn are used to send and receive data, most of the time in form of the very basic RPC-Commands.

A connection could be a direct QUIC connection to the server,
the ability to tunnel through the svalin main server or it could wrap a direct connection to another node.

As a connection is just a trait, svalin can easily be extended to tunnel through other protocols or build direct P2P connections.

### The Session primitive

A session is an open communication channel to another node. A session is usually bound to a context.
So you'd use one session to monitor running processes and another one to connect to a terminal session.

The session already provides the utility to write and read data types which implement Serde's Serialize and Deserialize traits.

Underneath the surface, the session uses a transport, which is just an asynchronous bi-directional byte stream.
This means that a session can run through basically every network connection or protocol.

That very same logic is also used to handle the E2E encryption. To establish an encrypted tunnel,
svalin just replaces the normal QUIC transport with a TLS-stream based on tokio-rustls.
The underlying RPC system doesn't know or care about the encryption.

## crate svalin_pki

This crate contains the code for certificate generation and encryption.

### TBRHL (Transaction Based Rolling Hash Ledger)

> [!Note]
> I am not a cryptography expert, you might even say I'm the opposite.
>
> This is the best I can currently come up with.
> I'm happy for any feedback or potentially better frameworks.

This primitive (yet to be completed) is planned to be the base for svalin's integrity system.

It's a log of transactions where each transaction contains the hash of the last one and is then signed by the entity creating the transaction.
Once available on more than one device, the log cannot be modified locally without leaving a trace as each device checks the plausability of each transaction.

So basically a cryptographic append-only-log

The simplest example is the transaction log which contains information about who may access an agent.
By comparing the hash of the latest transactions between an agent and a server, a client may detect malicous manipulation.
Every device working with this log will verify it's integrity and plausability by itself, making manipulation extremely difficult.

Each Transaction contains the following data:
- incremental transaction id
- Timestamp
- Hash of previous transaction
- Fingerprint of certificate used to sign
- data

For this to work, the log must conform to these standarts:
- [ ] Each transaction is signed
- [ ] Transactions are synchronized (easy with only one server)
- [ ] Transactions are serializeable

There are some challenges left though:
- [ ] How are old transactions treated when a certificate used to sign them runs out?
- [ ] How are old transactions treated when a certificate used to sign them gets revoked?
- [ ] When should an entity other than agent and server get access? Becauses that might leak the certificates.

One thing I'm still not clear about is how to distribute the certificates.
I could just put them all in a large THRBL together with revocations and distribute them that way.
The problem is, that this would leak all active and old certificates.

### crate svalin_macros

You'll find svalins macros here

### crate svalin_sysctl

This crate contains code used by the agent for monitoring and managing a system.

You might be interested in this crate if you want to build something similar to svalin or maybe a local UI for managing certain system settings.

# Todo

## Strategy
- [ ] get really basic version working (soon)
- [ ] add test so refactors arent as risky (already got some, but need more.)
- [ ] find some epic rust nerds who can help me fix my architecture and get this in a stable state
- [ ] find a way to reveal this with a big bang so I can find even more really cool nerds to gather feedback and extend this
- [ ] have a small but nice community around svalin
- [ ] ???
- [ ] profit

## Simple
- [ ] Show Unlock Error when password on profile unlock wrong
- [ ] Fix as many warnings as possible

## Bigger
- [ ] Add documentation for all public RPC types
- [ ] Add support for IPv6
- [ ] Rate Limiting
- [X] Init Routine
- [ ] Login Routine (make sure the server sent hashing parameters are strong enough and non existant users are simulated with key derived hashing parameters)
- [X] Unlock Routine
- [X] Make Credentials use an Arc internally
- [X] Agent init / join
- [X] Connection forwarding
- [X] E2E Encryption
- [X] List all agents with connection status
- [X] Show realtime performance ingo
- [X] Basic Port-Forwarding
- [ ] Remote Terminal (UI has been to laggy so far)

## Architecture
- [X] crate for local system managment and package management (WIP)
- [X] Framework for permission system
- [ ] Basic permission system
- [ ] Network Security System and Alerting
- [ ] Replace certificate distribution with better system (possibly TBRHL)
- [ ] Think of way to nicely and securely distribute group and system state
- [ ] More general information subscription system (e.g. CPU utilization, connected clients)

## Milestones
- [ ] Basic Managment (Live)
- [ ] Remote Desktop
- [ ] Network Security System and Alerting
- [ ] IPv6 Support
- [ ] Group Configuration Managment
- [ ]

## Svalin Network Architecture

1. QUIC with Network Authentication and Path encryption
2. Routing through the Svalin Network
3. P2P Encryption
